- sup fella how are you good to see you
again man likewise I've been reading
that you are having some great success
with your machine finally it's
everything's up and running last time we
talked you had yet to implement it
actually out in the wild and now you
explain to us what happened you had some
bumps in the beginning right yes yeah so
it's been quite a quite a few years
finally something's happening so we we
launched her first ocean system from San
Francisco in September of last year and
we we took it out and roughly two months
later we figured that first of all it
wasn't catching plastic so what we saw
was that the system was moving at
roughly the same speed as the plastic so
maybe you just take one step back the
idea and how it works so so of course
with this Great Pacific Garbage Patch
between here and Hawaii
twice the size of Texas one hundred
million kilos of plastic doesn't go away
by itself and the idea was to to have
this artificial coastline that is driven
by the forces of the ocean we put it in
there and the plastic naturally
accumulates against it and kind of stays
in there so we can then periodically get
it out because the the big challenge is
that although there's a lot of plastic
it's it's spread out over this vast area
so we first have to concentrate it
before we can take it out because if you
were to simply troll the ocean for
plastic with boats and nets it would
just take forever really so so the idea
was to - to have those artificial
coastlines we deployed the first one and
then what we saw was that somehow the
system was moving at the same speed as
the plastic so you can imagine if you
know this is like your pac-man and this
is your your you know your your catch
and is moving at the same speed it's not
going in and sometimes it did go in but
it went out again we got a video of it
what it was other that's great yeah so
so this is the basic idea but it wasn't
doing that so so and then you know we
thought okay that's that's all right
well learn from it we'll try and adjust
the systems and then literally exactly a
year ago
the system broke into two and so at the
structural failure forcing us to tell
the whole thing back to land and go back
to the drawing board so so we didn't
have the the best start of this year how
much time has been lost or how much time
has been spent I should say in the
beginning phase the initial yeah version
that you launched I was worried about
now so we've been going on at this for
since 2013 also softer yes a busy after
five years launching it and seeing it
break into two that was wasn't the the
best start of the year could could have
imagined but then you know went to the
drawing board and the team really took
it well they and we took those lessons
into account adjusted to design and
relaunch really just a few months later
so in June and this time we made the
system a little bit a bit more modular
so we could try different things to try
and adjust the speed make you go faster
make it go slower and then what we
figured was well the system isn't going
fast enough what if we actually turn the
problem into a solution what if we turn
it around and actually slow it down so
that it goes slower than the plastic and
then what we figured that that actually
works and in October we announced that
we're actually catching plastic and
really just last week the first two
shipping containers flula plastic were
or landed important Wow so it's really
recently up and running yeah you
expected now how long does it take to
accumulate two shipping containers full
so that was roughly month month and a
half and how big of these shipping
containers 20-foot so 42 of these rooms
so the only thing that's really stopping
it from getting more is like the actual
size of the net itself yes so so that's
the next step so now that we went from 0
to 1 we have the basic principle of
catching plastic confirmed we now have
to make it bigger before we can build a
whole fleet of them because you know
we've we reckon we need maybe 50 or 100
of them to really clean up half this
patch of 5 years that's that's the
objective half the whole patch in five
years that's the real objective that's
how is that really possible if you have
enough systems yeah that's incredible
now where you at in terms of like trying
to get
systems made and implemented so so the
so now we just finished this this first
step with the system number one that's
how we called it and the next step is to
develop what we call system 2 which is
indeed going to be a bigger version and
it deers to minimize the amount of
vessel use that you need for it so that
comes because boats are really fucking
expensive yeah the boat that we have
costs roughly 15,000 euros per day to
keep running well it's just one boat so
boat you don't want boats to you know
would you anticipate that it ever gets
to a point where the amount of money
that you can generate from the actual
resource of physical plastic can
actually pay for the expert the whole
experiment I mean hope so that's what we
want to trial next year with by making
products from the catch that we that we
make and the material itself hardly has
any value it's it's really the story to
it and she makes draws don't feel guilty
yeah it's a recycled straw yeah now
without yeah that's a terrible idea
but what would it be a very sustainable
business model just yeah just keeps
going yeah what is the what are the
products that you're thinking about ah
everything with a few ideas we it's
still kind of under development so I
think in September we should be ready to
launch the first one but I think it's
going to be things that that are durable
that don't end up in ways that you
actually that will retain their value so
can last for a very very long time and
that check she wants and ideally carry
around so you can talk about with other
people and actually now's a just last
week we with that first plastic oh sure
we said okay now we welcome our
supporters to actually make well Xuan
called a reservation but kind of make a
make a down payment so that you can be
first in line so if people go to our
website they can actually put in the 50
bucks and get the right for the first
ever products made from the Great
Pacific Garbage Patch so you're just
trying to figure out what products will
have the most sustainability what
products people keep for the
yeah and think that people want dry you
don't want some kind of gimmick that's
just going to be this paperweight
flip-flop seemed like an easy one right
yeah don't they I mean people love to
buy flip flops if they had bought flip
flops especially people that are like
sort of like outdoorsy type folks sure
appreciate the beach and maybe have to
write these things down flip flops
that's pretty easy one
any other ideas um what else Jamie what
else would be a good one
belts people like belts shoes any
flip-flop shoes like definitely some
Yeezys some dope Rhys I get ya some
recycled sneakers like what is foam like
the foam that they make running shoes
out of that's a very specific type of
yeah it's not actual plastic right
something else it's a type of plastic
yeah we might be able to to foam this
mature as well I think we've done tests
with that
oh really turn it into foam yes oh
there's some sort of a process yeah yeah
I mean you could make athletic shoes
that'd be easy right people but they
would you'd have to have a way to make
to like incentivize people to recycle
them it would be so ironic for those
fucking things wound up back in the
ocean you know there's got to be a way
to do that just tell you know like have
like if you have your own company like
drop-off points in cities where when
they're done with their stuff if it's
broken down or it's old they've used it
you could throw it into this bin and
what you will ensure that it gets
converted back into raw materials and
utilized again right yeah sir can I come
in yeah that'd be a great move if you
can people would do that if they if you
made it easy for them you know it sort
of like recycling bins they make it easy
for them they'll throw their bottle in
there sure no so you have these two
cargo ships or these two cargo
containers filled with this plastic
stuff what do you do with it now
yeah so that's going to Europe before
true there isn't really any useful
recycling infrastructure in the US so so
we set up this this infrastructure in
Europe to be able to first sort it and
then shred it and then recycle it and
then make those first products out of
them so hopefully and hopefully with
that then generate the
- needed to to continue running the
cleanup but of course now it's still
small-scale right eventually we should
have those number of shipping containers
every you know every day Rolly so do you
have a your group of people that's
trying to come up with ideas of what to
make out of the plastic yeah it's a
little team in inside they were to clean
up working on that and yeah so they I
think they say that by September they
should be ready to to launch the first
product that's it
that's great man that's the whole idea
behind it's beautiful don't you have a
river system too as well right yes so so
that's the other thing right so on one
hand we need to we need to clean up
what's what's running in the ocean
doesn't go away by itself and yeah
basically the only way to deal with that
is to just go out there and clean it up
but of course then there's this this
other side of the equation which is
there's still huge huge amounts of
plastic flowing into the ocean every day
mostly from countries in Central America
South Southeast Asia where people are
kind of this the stage of development or
countries are at a stage of development
where where the people are wealthy
enough to consume a lot of things that
are wrapped in plastic yet there isn't
any waste infrastructure yet to take
care of it so you literally see people
on on scooters just drive on the to
bridge to dump their municipal waste
into the river because that's simply the
easiest way to get rid of it to your
point you know what's easiest people
will do and so it's not really let
people you know don't care there or that
they are less civilize is something but
it's really the combination there's a
lot of people and there is no
infrastructure that they can make use of
so so then back in 2015 we were like
okay maybe at some point in time this
this Ocean thing will work out who knows
but then we're stuck with this problem
that there's still so much plastic
flowing in that we would just have to
keep going forever and that would just
be no not very motivating and we want to
be this project with the beginning and
an end so so we're like okay so where's
the plastic coming from and
we figured you know probably rivers
rivers are like these these arteries
that carry the trash from from land to
sea because when it rains plastic washes
from Street to creeks to river to ocean
and but then we found out that there is
a hundred thousand rivers in the world
so that's kind of a big amount if you
want to do something about it so so we
started doing measurements in rivers and
then what we found was that just one
percent of rivers are responsible for
80% of the of the pollution so really
just a very tiny amount of rivers if you
were to tackle those could really
address them the majority of of the
plastic going into the ocean and it's
it's mostly like these relatively small
rivers in in capital cities like Manila
like Jakarta like Kuala Lumpur we have
very high density of people near the
coasts that's where most of the leakage
most of the emissions occurs so so since
2015 we've been kind of as a secret side
project been working on seeing what can
work she develops something to to
intercept the plastic in those rivers
and we just launched it a month ago we
call it the Interceptor and it's this
yeah it is a scalable system that that's
almost like plug in place so you bring
it to a river and you install it and it
it just works it's fully autonomous
solar-powered so this is all real the
real plastic that's being pulled out of
this river yeah that's it from your
machine yeah so this is credible this
was the prototype that's amazing this
was in Jakarta for people that are just
listening we're looking at this thing
pull enormous amounts of plastic out of
this river and it's also doing so in in
there they're stacking it into these
bags it's a large physical quantity of
stuff oh yeah and then maybe you can
actually put up the video interceptor
too and in Malaysia so we already have
two of them in in real life as we speak
how does it avoid doing anything with
fish how do you avoid
accidentally oh my god is that real yes
this is this is the clang River in Kuala
Lumpur and it's according to our model
it's like the fifth most polluting river
in the world so 1% of all plastic going
into the world's oceans is coming from
that one river and this is unbelievable
how polluted this is this is crazy
ten million kilos per year roughly so
just just looking at it looks like a
wasteland that's so sad yeah so so then
we so we now at four interceptors two of
them have already been deployed so
here's the one going to to the to this
Klang river and kind of wanted to make
it look like a like a spaceship just so
people would like it and so it has this
barrier that that concentrates the
plastic to the mouth of the interceptor
where you have a conveyor belt but then
scoops it out of the water again fully
solar and battery powered and then
deposits it on to this moving shadow
conveyor which then distributes it
across these big dumpsters can hold
roughly 50 cubic meters of trash and
yeah it just works by itself so it's
that's what it does how much this that's
an insane amount of garbage that you're
pulling out of there you when you look
at it visit visually folks you can watch
the video what is the name of this video
Jamie some people you define rivers
interceptor 0:02 cleaning in Malaysia is
the title of the YouTube video it's
crazy now and you're not catching any
fish in this oh yeah so so because this
this barrier is non-permeable the
current just flows underneath it's
basically that the sea life can just
pass it make sure at one point we had
this giant lizard which was probably 2
meters we should bring post that photo
it was she kind of climbing onto the
barrier and then it just swam around it
so 2 meters really yeah everyone a half
thick it was what kind of lizard is that
I don't don't know the name but it was
some kind of monitor or something
monitored that yeah you're right yeah
yeah do you know where's that you see if
an image of that no do you post it next
week
oh you haven't posted no
okay he was looking for it yeah I
thought you were saying it was out there
so it's safe for fish what about the
stuff that doesn't float on the very
surface right so this isn't goes down
one meter what we measured is that
really almost all the plastic isn't that
top layer so sure you know won't be a
hundred percent efficient but I think
it's it's really about having this
pragmatic thing that catches most of it
and it most importantly leaves wildlife
alone because everything else can just
swim underneath that exactly yeah that's
that's great and so this plan that you
had when you know it's been six years
running how much of your daily time is
devoted to this oh I don't think there's
much much free time at all it's so
special past year I've not had a single
free day so not a single yeah just 9:00
a.m. - usually you know 9:00 p.m. in the
office just it's been busy but I think
it was it was worth it now looking where
we were at beginning of the year to
where we're now well now that you've
actually pulled these cargo containers
filled with plastic out of the ocean
that must give you an extreme feeling of
satisfaction right you've you've
actually made it work like it's moving
now so I was I was kind of hoping for
that feeling but then when you get to
that point you're like okay but they're
still you can really only see the amount
of work that's still ahead of you so so
it's actually really hard to have enjoy
successes in a way I should probably get
better at that it's hard well
particularly what you're doing you have
a monumental task in front of you and
what you're doing is rightly being
applauded by so many people but I don't
know how many people are actually
helping you you you have a crazy thing
that you're doing you're trying to pull
the plastic out of the ocean when people
find out about the Great Pacific Garbage
Patch they they get panicky they're like
what how long has this been going on how
do i how do I not know about this
because so few people I mean I would
think like maybe 40% of the population
understands there's a gigantic patch of
garbage in the middle of the ocean and
it was discovered
20 years ago exactly 20 years ago and
still it's there just been growing Oh
1998 no one had a goddamn clue nope and
then they went we hate what what's going
on here yeah is all this garbage and it
keeps getting bigger and bigger right
yeah it's actually quite a good story
this is the Sailor called Charles Moore
it was participating in a sail race
between Hawaii and California and while
others would go further north you
thought well let's try and cut off this
this piece and then he was looking at
the water and he just just saw that all
that trash and then he went back he was
shocked about it and then he decided to
take some measurements publish the
results and that kind of popularized
that whole concept of the Great Pacific
Garbage Patch mmm it's a weird thing to
see when you see drones flying over it
and you see the footage of it and and
it's also it's it's a lot a lot of it is
a lot smaller than people think of it
right because it's broken down by the
ocean right yeah so that's that's what
happens over time is that this these
larger objects how it enters the ocean
due to the working of the ways as well
as the Sun breaks down to these smaller
and smaller pieces which is actually not
really a good thing because these
smaller pieces are then easier to ingest
for for fish and other wildlife so so
the smaller gets in a way that the more
harmful it gets as well and fortunate
what we see is that still 92% of the
plastic is still non micro plastic so
big stuff but of course if we don't
clean it up over the next few decades
all of that big stuff will also become
micro plastics and then in a much worse
day is the cleanup of micros micro
plastics possible or is it just
something that needs to be sort of
rethought out well so that was actually
one of the positive surprises that we
that we had this year is that the clean
of system in the patch wasn't just
catching plastic and not just the big
stuff it was also catching most of the
micro plastics so down to 100 meters
clogged up with all the other stuff is
that what it is we're not exactly sure
how it was able to do that but we just
saw huge amounts of those those micro
plastics and in this
it's probably has to do something with
the radiation of the way so you have
that big pipe that keeps the system
together and because waves are kind of
crashing against it it reflects waves as
well and almost like a lens
it was concentrating those micro
plastics into one patch in the middle of
the system which I was kind of just
holding up into into the system so it
was so that's that was really we weren't
expecting to collect micro plastics but
there we were that's pretty cool so now
where you at in terms of trying to
expand it to a point where you could you
know really get this goal of half of the
plastic or the ocean in five years yeah
so so it would probably be easier if we
had one goal but we now set two goals
for ourselves one is the 50% of
five-year for the for the patch but the
other one is that we want to have
interceptors into the 1,000 most
polluting rivers the ones that do the 80
percent in in the next five years so
will be will be pretty busy really
really busy
yes so if you're not busy enough yeah
how many people are working for your in
your organization now about a hundred
and I think really team is being as now
better than it's ever been so
fortunately there's there's definitely
love help but we're still recruiting not
quite I think not not our twenty thirty
people coming up here so so definitely
there is a lot of work to do and what is
this ride been like for you from being
this like really young guy when you
figure this out like how old were you
when you came up with the idea first
ideas when it was 16 but really founded
the organization when it was 18
yeah so that's really young eighteen to
where you are now just being constantly
involved in this process what does I've
been like for you educational I would
say so really when I started and I'm
gonna look back at when I started I
really didn't have a bloody clue what I
was doing and I suppose that was a good
thing because if I would have known how
complicated and big it would have to
become in order to actually
take some plastic out of the ocean I
probably wouldn't have started it was
just too big and remember doing the
giving my first presentation back in
2012 and somebody approached me and he
said okay great idea it's going to cost
like tens of millions of dollars you're
going to need a team of maybe a hundred
people to to to get this to a point that
it could actually work and I thought
this guy was crazy no way you can so
that's why it has started a two million
dollar crowdfunding campaign to to get
it started and yeah he was closer to the
truth than I could have ever imagined
when you when you think about the amount
of time that you're investing in this
deed how do you see yourself ever
getting off this ride does this what you
want to do for the rest of your life no
so I I do I simply want to solve
problems and I think this is kind of a
good starter problem it's I think it's
very feasible to actually solve it it's
by the way hilarious that you're talking
about the Great Pacific Garbage Patch as
a starter problem Oh what kind of
ambition do you have that's one of the
most perplexing problems with the
garbage and waste today yeah but I do
think it's it's solvable and it's I
think it is - according to you and
though you're saying but to call it a
starter problem Salieri's yeah yeah and
I mean I think this was a exciting thing
for me is that it's I can pick this
promise that's the first one because I
believed it would not just be solvable
it's solvable by a relatively small
group of passionate people and yeah so
of course what I hope is that with the
OSHA clean we can kind of create this
blueprint of how you solve a problem and
how you how you make civilization a bit
more sustainable so that hopefully with
the blueprint we can not only solve more
other problems in the future but also
inspire others to to do the same thing
well that's a beautiful sentiment and do
you have any other things that you want
to try to solve once you
sort of stepped away from this mm-hmm
yeah so I really I just definitely not
going to be a shortage of ideas so I
keep this little booklet so that's kind
of overflowing but what I realize is to
to be successful with the cleanup I
really need razor-sharp focus and I can
only do one thing at the same time and
like IDs are like viruses and when they
enter your mind it kind of expands and
evolves and it's really quite dangerous
actually to have new ideas it was I
forget who said that but somebody
recently I heard saying the best thing
you can do is having one great idea than
never having any other ideas and the
rest of your life so just because you
know to be your resources right yeah to
achieve something you need full focus I
think was Stewart Brand but two good
things it's it's accurate what do you
think though about what I was going to
get at was do you ever conceive of a
possibility of coming up with something
that removes carbon from the atmosphere
that's a giant issue with us right right
carbon emissions so definitely I believe
negative emissions I think you refer to
them will be required to make the goals
to kind of keep the warming in check
it's however it's a much more difficult
problem because if you think of the
ocean it's it's busy a two dimensional
problem it's a plastic on the surface
and fortunately it's not even the whole
ocean it's it's kind of concentrating in
these accumulation zone so the Garbage
Patch although it's twice the size of
Texas it's still one point six million
square kilometers while the ocean is
like three hundred million square
kilometres so it's really just maybe
less than a percent of the ocean which
needs to be cleaned and it's a again
it's a two-dimensional problem well the
atmosphere is three-dimensional so it's
just this is one dimensional increase is
just
yeah it's just a huge challenge so I do
think it needs to be tech oh and it's
definitely exciting problem to think
about I do think that's definitely
that's not a good starter problem to to
work huh
no um wasn't there something Jamie that
we had talked about where they had
figured out a way to make these building
sized essentially vacuum cleaners they
were gonna put in the center of certain
cities I believe it was in Asia maybe
perhaps China they'd come up with this
and the I don't know if they implemented
it yet but the idea was to have these
enormous things that place that look
like a skyscraper and really it was just
a huge vacuum cleaner for carbon sure I
know they're of a few companies that
working with they've carbon engineering
is one there is also there's also one
out of Switzerland forgot the name but
so so definitely good smart people are
working on that problem I'm not sure
where they are in terms of the economics
and sit right here when you mentioned
his carbon engineering is this one okay
so that looks like giant fans like a
huge building filled with fans we
believe humanity can solve climate
change he hikes imagine like we have
filters for air the same way of filters
for water direct air captured technology
carbon engineering more than ten years
in the making that can capture carbon
dioxide directly from the atmosphere and
look at that machine try to get a
close-up on what that thing looks like
it looks like giant fucking washing
machine right like it's washing the air
doesn't it look a giant washing machines
Wow that mean it seems like it's
feasible it doesn't seem like it's
something that's impossible
yeah I think that's the scalability that
that's the main Ryland
well it's also funding like if you drive
over or fly over Manhattan rather and
see the density of the structures and
how many buildings are in there you know
that people can make some pretty insane
shit right why couldn't they make some
giant insane vacuum cleaner for the air
that's you know as big as a city block
of course a lot of it comes down to
economics or our system it's not very
good at valuing things that our
long-term are directly benefit ourselves
so
so definitely people tax it no fun both
find a way to make it profitable is this
another one rendering of what one would
look like to capture 1 million tons of
co2 per year whoa sounds like it looks
like it'd be noisy yo yeah probably
annoying as fuck
look at those fans it's so weird though
like the whole array of fans okay that
seems like a way to do it
looks like somebody built a giant
computer and tried to cool everything
and then know how all this carbon what
the fuck they do with that
burn it what do they do what do you make
shit out of it what do you do make
diamonds imagine that that is her girl's
best friend and making that other carbon
that you pull out of the air
that would be a great business model
this would be like a green diamond right
a diamond that's actually made and it's
all pressured by solar power the use
solar power to fucking smash it a
freight car that's same carbon fiber I
don't know is it the same shit yeah why
not right cause be it's carbon right so
carbon is how they may die it's coal
right which is essentially carbon right
do they make diamonds from carbon or
they make diamonds just from coal what
is cool coals like burnt shit right
there's many many forms in which carbon
exists yeah so I know there's still
structure they are doing that now where
they are making commercially made
diamonds diamonds are made of carbon so
they form as carbon atoms under a high
temperature and pressure they bond
together to start growing crystals
that's why a diamond is such a hard
material because you have each carbon
atom participating in four of these very
strong covalent bonds that form between
carbon atoms
I've never word that read that word out
loud covalent have you ever read that
word out well covalent is that I said
I've never even seen that word so these
bonds that form between carbon atoms so
that I know they're doing it now they're
they're making diamonds with certain
machines high pressure yeah if they did
that would be that would be hilarious
that would be a good thing too because
they would put a dent in the actual
diamond market which is this weird lock
down fucking strange market because
diamonds aren't nearly as valuable as
they're set out to be De Beers takes
these diamonds and they stockpile them
and they only release a certain amount
they keep the price very high but it's
all engineered like the profit like
diamonds used to be far more rare than
they are now but with the innovation in
mining technology and their ability to
get to diamonds they couldn't get to
before they have a lot of diamonds okay
it's not as valuable as it appears when
you go to buy one okay so we can make
carbon diamonds bro I'm actually plastic
again carbon chains others oh yeah we
turn even make diamonds out of ocean but
whoa that would be the ultimate green
diamond imagine like if you like a
really ecologically minded rapper you
wear out all your ice could come from
the ocean let everybody know from trash
to treasure yes they dude that's the
fucking that's that's the signature of
the company in quotes from trash to
treasure write these things down boy in
diamonds how about that I like it yeah
dude you could be the first guy to do
this here we go
a plastic this is an ocean diamond whoa
earth is crushing the ocean into salty
diamonds that's a dope looking diamond
to salt I guess
recreated salty diamond deposits in a
high-pressure high-temperature
experiment suggesting that many of
Earth's diamonds form when the mantle
crushes ancient seabed minerals oh isn't
science and the earth cool I mean if you
do get to do this here's another problem
okay here's a big one for the ocean
we're depleting it of seafood right I
mean we you know I had how do you say
his name again
sequoias right Louie Psihoyos
who directed the cove on yeah we were
talking about the depletion depletion on
the wildlife in the in the ocean and
when you start looking at it on a grand
scale like how much fish they're pulling
out of the oceans it's very sobering you
know sure maybe you can come up with a
way to replenish well fish in the ocean
so we can continue eating sushi yeah so
so maybe could just zoom out a bit and
realize oh what is so because
of course plastic pollution climate
change overfishing I think it's all part
of one big problem to make civilization
sustainable and the way I look at it is
that of course over the past 200 years
humanity has made tremendous progress so
of course since agriculture revolution
10,000 years ago UNT has been kind of
stagnant no progress or just very very
slow progress number of people lifespan
it was all kind of flat nothing really
happened and then since the dawn of the
Industrial Revolution and when we
learned how to utilize science and our
knowledge collective knowledge to to
turn that into progress basically every
possible metric for Humanity has
improved tremendously and if you think
of wealth health violence education
rights all these things and no you
that's Steven Pinker on these is much
more knowledgeable on that topic than I
am yet so it's a truly at this point in
time it has never been a better time to
be alive for humans than been today not
saying that it can't get better but we
have made tremendous progress by one
hand in imagining things that don't
exist yet so inventing technologies and
also inventing institutions and on the
other hand our human ability to
collaborate effectively in large numbers
which includes you know the corporation
which is a very effective way for people
to to work together now all that
progress has always has also had its
negative side effects which are most
pronounced of course in the area of the
environment where we put things into an
environment that shouldn't belong there
and we take too much out of it then
nature can replenish which includes you
know the fish and on the other hand you
have the plastic going into the
environment etc so so and the question
is well how do we solve that and of
course one hand is to say okay it's kind
of the
the maybe the Luddite is maybe a bit of
a negative way to phrase it but the a
reactionary approach of saying okay we
should consume less corporations are bad
knowledge is bad we should all get rid
of all those things and I think the
environment the modern environmental
movement which is we can do this
Romantic movement has this image of back
in the day everything was great and we
lived in harmony with nature so let's
get rid of all this modernity and try
and return to that pure original state
what I however believe is that first of
all that's I don't think it's a very
realistic thing people want to keep
their iPhones and their cars and you
know people want to move forward and at
the same time I don't think it's really
the most effective way to to solve these
problems because it would be like
fighting a leopard tank with bow and
arrow you know technology is nothing
more than an enabler of human
capabilities it enhances our power so
why not use that power to also try and
solve these these these problems as well
so rather than try and reject business
reject technology I truly believe that
we should embrace those those forces
that make us human and and has created
this amazing world to also try and solve
these these negative side effects as
well and that's why I believe you know
the over camp overconsumption of fish is
not going to end by people all becoming
vegan but rather through you know fake
meat I think that the transport
emissions are not going to be solved by
people not flying anymore or not going
anywhere anymore realistically people
are going to fly more so we better
invent technologies that allow people to
do that without harming the environment
and the same thing I think would be the
case for for for plastic and really
other energy uses as well no I think
that's a very wise way of looking at it
and it's a it's a hopeful way of looking
at it it's funny that today you kind of
even it though you're you're you're
dealing with statistics and facts
information like the fact that it's a
safer to live today there's less violent
crime it's easier to get by this more
technology more innovation medical
technologies improve radically all these
things are true but you still have to
say it's not where we want it to be
right so we're not saying that the
worlds but we have to say that even to
you like even though you're I mean like
it's it's the worry about people barking
at you so worried about people it's
still terrible in parts of the world
it's terrible for the people of color
it's still terrible for trans it still I
can't get it no one saying that there's
not room for improvement but you have to
say that like you even know you felt
compelled you like it's still not
perfect yeah and I wonder why it's so so
controversial I think it's important to
learn from the things that we do well
and then apply that I don't think it is
that controversial I think it's a trick
I think there's just a lot of people
looking for every single opportunity to
complain even to someone like you who
has you know objectively done nothing
but good they say one thing like it I
mean Steven Pinker took a ton of heat or
saying that and even though he's talking
about actual scientific statistics he's
just it's not saying the world is
perfect and everyone should shut up what
he's saying is we should look at this
you know from a bird's eye view look
down and understand that although
there's much work to be done we're in a
great place in comparison to the rest of
human history and it's it's helpful to
realize that progress is possible just
yet every there's something that feels
intuitively right as if every step
forward would also have to equal a step
backward elsewhere yes and I don't think
that's that's the case there's plenty of
things that you can invent that that are
are not that like and we see it for
example with carbon right now that
there's countries where like like Sweden
GDP has grown a lot past 20 years
carbon emissions has gone down so they
call that the the decoupling and I think
what's really the the main challenge in
this century is to decouple human
progress
from those negative side effects and I
think the way to do that it's not
reactionary it's really again through
innovation and through to collaboration
I I agree with you and I think that a
lot of times people just assume that
this is these are the consequences of
innovation there's a pro and a con to
everything because there has been so
many things there have been so many
things and there are inventions that
where there are a pro and a con to it
but that doesn't necessarily mean it has
to be that way no and even if things
have a pro and a con it doesn't mean the
Pro is as big as the comp so and if that
would be the case all the technology
every technology would be neutral and a
wooden limit it wouldn't matter what
your events but it would mean that an
atomic bomb is morally as neutral as an
ocean clean up system which I just don't
find plausible so I don't believe that
inventors entrepreneurs they put certain
morality into their creations into their
technology there is there is a certain
use that you prescribe with your
invention when you don't use nuclear
bombs to wash your car right so I mean
you use it not for benign uses unless
maybe you want to terraform Mars which
there are some people proposed to do
with atomic bombs I don't know what is
good at it but yeah I don't think
technology is neutral - it has a more
morality so what that means is that as
long as we consequent consistently
develop net positive technologies you
know eventually the world does get
better and better if say to not only 60%
Goods and maybe has 40% downside and
okay but then we can invent a solution
for that 40 percent and maybe that's
again net positive and you can't get
this this cascade of ever improving what
no I think what you're saying sounds
beautiful and if more people thought the
way you're thinking I think the world
would be a better place I like the the
positivity
the optimism and what you're thinking in
terms particularly in terms of what's
what's possible with innovation yeah
well I I just don't think that being
against something is very productive I
yeah it's it doesn't really move us
forward so rather than you know
protesting against the things that I
don't agree with and there's so many
things that I don't agree with but again
I don't think it's very helpful rather
than doing that I might rather built
towards the future that I I do agree
with you listen man I think what you're
saying is very very logical I wish more
people thought like you you're a great
role model for a lot of kids to use your
energy in a positive direction
you know Ken it can be done yeah sure I
mean I think we agree with your yeah do
you think that I mean when you're
looking at this this possibility of
getting 50% of the oceans garbage out in
five years do you think that's realistic
in terms of like the resources that you
have the the funding that you have and
all this stuff and if not how can people
help is there do you have a website
where people can yeah so so definitely
you know we don't yet have both you know
we don't have the technology ready yet
to to really clean up the patch the
river is different story we're really
ready to scale but on the ocean we we
still need some you know need some
iteration and of course the funding
isn't there yet so of course on our
website the ocean cleanup come people
can donate people can also okay cool
there go support the cleanup yeah and so
you have is it like PayPal or what is it
yeah anything you want and you can make
you can join the queue for for the
products though that's excellent
beautiful and so and are you getting a
lot of success with that people are
contributing so definitely so far has
been enough to keep the keep the
development going so it hasn't really
been the
the limiting factor but of course if we
want to scale we're going to need a lot
more resources so so definitely a lot of
help will be required there coming years
it's amazing that this is taking you so
long and that you've been working on it
so hard that you you have all this
energy to be able to pursue something
like this I mean it was there every time
while you're doing this would be like
Jesus Christ I don't know I'm gonna be
able to do this is it sustainable like
this every day no days off constant yeah
so part I should take a few days off
hell yeah oh there yeah this year has
been you feel guilty if you take time
off ah yeah you know but yeah so I
usually I feel that with a lot of my
that's pretty case for everyone that a
lot of my strengths are at the same time
also my weaknesses so I think I'm pretty
creative so it's good but at the same
time it means that you know I really
have to force myself to not be
distracted by new ideas
I think I'm have a good work ethic but
but you know the downside is that it's
also very hard to slow down and I do
realize that taking taking breaks it is
eventually it is better it does the best
ideas that I've had were during word
during times off really like even the
ocean cleanup idea was I was 16 was
scuba diving in Greece so I'm more
blessing than fish yeah that was during
during a break so so I should probably
take a few days yeah man just go you
know go somewhere we could just take a
few naps just relax recharge yeah get
your system back online perfectly yeah
though I think once I know to make is
that you know with everything that I've
ever done in my life of what's been very
obsessed about it and I think when you
know it's something that you cannot
really stop thinking about it
it's it never really feels like work
either
so it's um I had a calling well yeah I
just wouldn't be able to imagine just
having a normal job doing something
you're not passionate about it's so so
yeah I never really miserable would it
be to just be in an office and I've just
stared the clock waiting for 6:00 p.m.
so you can go home right it must be
that's like my biggest nightmare for a
lot of people is their life you know
well yeah I don't mean to offend I've
had anyone here but you're being nice
again yeah no I understand exactly
saying and a lot of people don't realize
that the biggest asset they have in
their life is their time and to spend
that wisely you have this is 80,000
hours of which I believe is like you
know 40 40 years 40 hours a week turns
out to that's 80,000 hours that you can
use for anything and and I do believe
that people often have a lot more
potential than than what they turn out
to be doing if they if they were to
realize how valuable that time is and
sort of the classic model also for more
wealthy people is to to work very hard
and then to kind of donate here and
there but probably you could be a lot
more effective if you were to just use
your brain use your time directly on you
know working something that matters
well I think what you just said is like
legitimate inspiration talk you know
there's a lot of people that write a
book you should well you mean just a
video I think it's good enough just a
video of you explaining your philosophy
you have accomplished so much and your
idea your that you're doing is so noble
and actually effective there's something
that people need to hear sometimes about
different people's philosophies on how
to spend their time and their energy and
your your perception of instead of
wasting it on
other things just concentrate on
something that you think is going to
make an impact something that you're
drawn to something that and yeah when
you do that then you have a cause and
you have a thing that you're working
towards it's not just simply showing up
and doing something that someone's
paying you to do that you don't
necessarily want to do which is a lot of
a trap a lot of people find themselves
in that trap and yeah they need to hear
people like you talk sometimes that's
that that's as inspirational as anyone
who's like a professional inspirational
or motivational speaker for a lot of
folks maybe more so because you're
actually doing something yeah well
probably my my words carry more
credibility once the oceans are actually
clean and yeah it'll help but just in
fact you get to cargo holds filled with
two cargo containers I mean who the fuck
has that no one you know come on big
blob some bags yeah you know and on the
river sweet yeah I've heard that amount
every day no really yeah every day on
the rivers Wow
did the river when you see that horrible
pollution drifting down river when you
see that stuff does that feel almost
like impossible to capture all of it or
pointless because people keep throwing
it in there well that's that's the thing
so we don't position this these
interceptors as being the solution the
ultimate solution for the hopeless oh of
course eventually you have to make sure
plastic doesn't end up in the ocean or
in the rivers in the first place right
so but I was standing so few weeks ago
was in in Indonesia and Malaysia to see
the machines and talk with you know
government people there and I was
standing on the Interceptor and you see
this constant very torrent of plastic
going into the Interceptor and from and
I was looking upstream and I realized
well there's there's more than five
million people living in the catchment
area of this river and they have limited
infrastructure they consume so much and
just trying to imagine all that plastic
not ending up in the river with just
such a diffused source five million
people it was just so hard to imagine
and of course
that's where we have to go to but
realistically speaking its is going to
take is going to take a while it's going
to take maybe two decades three decades
something like that so I think rather
than kind of staring at kind of the
perfect solution and really just working
on on that which of course it's very
important I think we also need to be a
bit more pragmatic and also realized
well okay they may take 20-30 years
let's at least make sure that during
those twenty thirty years we don't have
ten million kilos of plastic flowing out
of this river in the ocean so you'd have
to have some sort of cooperation with
the people that are doing that and
chucking that plastic into the river so
yeah yeah so somebody's got to figure
out a way to get to them so I do hope
that the interceptors can have a
positive influence upstream as well or
people say oh I don't worry about it
they're gonna think now yeah it's the
best place to throw your plastic because
they got a thing guilt free dumping yeah
no no side that that hazardous copy or
that risk is called moral hazards and
it's a phrase from economics where in in
the insurance industry it's kind of a
thing where people make more damage once
they are in short because we're all
worried I don't buy it that much as an
argument for for the plastic problem
because it's not like it's a it's a
conscious cost-benefit analysis whether
you going to throw something on the
street or not it's more of a unconscious
thing you just do it right or at least I
hope you don't but some people do and
and then it's with that same logic why
maybe municipality should also stop
sweeping the streets and maybe we
shouldn't even collect garbage at
people's houses because I'd only
incentivizes the creation of garbage so
so I I don't think that it's not you
know and then there's this other effect
called the broken window effect which
where I think it was back in the sixties
in New York what they found is that in
streets and neighborhoods where you have
buildings that show obvious sign of
decay like broken wheat that's where the
name comes from broken windows or litter
that actually would incentivize other
unlawful activities so the similar
effect has been observed with like a
park if a park doesn't have any litter
people litter less than when there is
litter on the ground so so Roger I think
is the opposite if you if you truly
believe that the ocean is going to be
polluted forever and it doesn't really
matter it's already dirty yeah that's
not really a strong motivation to to not
litter but if you say okay well ocean is
clean now then they love effort for that
and yeah once once it's clean I think
that would actually be a motivation to
to to not bitter I think you're a
hundred percent right I think some of
those videos where you see shorelines
that are so thick I don't know what part
of the world it is but that are so thick
with plastic you can't even get into the
water like you can't wait out there and
swim yes it's it's so disheartening and
you you wonder where the world will be
if not for people like you that are
trying to come up with a solution where
the world will be in 50 years 50 years
ago this wasn't the case now it is if
you could see like a time-lapse video of
these oceans from like go back to 1900
to 2019 and then go back before 1900
does is relatively unchanged for
thousands of years right and then also
this massive change very quickly with
the Industrial Age yeah but again I
believe this is a transition phase it's
like our modern civilization being in
its sort of teenage years and yes I have
to grow out of it and couldn't agree
more I I hope I hope this worry that we
all have will translate into improvement
in progress and I always say the same
thing that we're in some sort of
adolescent stage of society and
evolution that we're in this weird sort
of state where we're aware of how
we can change our environment but also
still contributing to the detriment of
our environment in a non sustainable way
and then eventually it's gonna have to
come to a head you know when you see
people screaming about climate change
and all these different things I mean
this is people realizing that this is
there's a lot going on that maybe not
everyone is completely and totally aware
of and but I'm with you I'm I think it's
it's good to be optimistic it's
healthier to be positive and I think it
is it's logical that people will find a
way out of this I really do yeah well
you know I'm not sure whether will be
right I think not sure either I I hope
we are that I think and I you know I
think eventually it's going to be fine
it's just a question of how long is it
going to take how much damage will have
been done in that period but
realistically it's it's the only way
there is a chance that we fare this out
right so have you faced in the
opposition to this is there anybody that
thinks is a fruitless idea yeah I know
there were people that were actually I
was very shocked
I read people that were actually happy
that your project didn't work the first
time
hey what the fuck man there's people
that I think it's a thing like cuz
you're this really hopeful young
intelligent guy who comes up with the
solution I think it probably was you
think he's so fuckin smart front-cam I
hope it fails and when it failed people
actually enjoyed it yeah yeah is that
did that hurt no so for me so yes of
course since the really since the
beginning 2013 there have been people
yeah like relatively small group of
people that have been people that have
been opposing it and most of them
ironically enough are people that care
about the ocean because they don't feel
it's the right way to to to check the
issue and but the way I deal with it is
at least what I used to do in the
beginning now they're fortunate there
aren't many new arguments anymore but
just better get right them out every
single argument rationally analyze them
know emotions emotions only model your
your thinking
way and make a distinction okay is this
something where this person has a point
if so great because rather have somebody
else pointing it out to me then us
having to learn it in the field and you
know having a having unnecessary failure
and if the person doesn't have a point
if it's just you know assumption or
unfounded or whatever now then is very
easy for me to just ignore it and so and
then the question is well what motivates
people to be negative and I think
there's pretty for reasons first of all
it's it's no genuine skepticism whether
it can be done and I think that's how
that's healthy and I think we've proved
most of those arguments wrong now but of
course there's still you know the whole
scale-up thing which it's to have to do
so so bit of that but it's kind of
morphing now to a few other things like
one thing is human risk perception which
sometimes I think is a it's a cause of
some opposition where it's very easy for
people to ignore the baseline when they
look at risks so you know you can for
example say okay nuclear power super
risky we shouldn't do that but then if
you compared to the baseline of other
sources of energy it's actually probably
the least risky source of energy there
is even solar energy is causes more
deaths per megawatt hour then then
nuclear power because people fall off
roofs so so it's really so if you ignore
the baseline and if you say okay doing
this cleanup we shouldn't do it because
there's all these potential risks right
of you know potentially there's some sea
life that may be caught potentially
there are these moral hazards there's
all these risks and you know basically
best thing to do is not do it what
people then are ignoring is sort of the
certain hazard off these hundreds of
millions of kilos of plastic that's
already in the ocean and
if you were to kind of pose the opposite
question to say okay so if we were to go
to the ocean right now and just dump the
equivalent amount of plastic that we
were to take out would dump it into the
ocean would you would you think that's a
good plan and then well probably the
answer is is no so so I think there's
there's a bit of this you know of course
of course what we're doing it's new
there are risks involved but as long as
we map them well we take things step by
step I think they're manageable and
they're definitely not risks or reasons
to do not do it because of course the
baseline is that there is already doing
a lot of harm being done by the status
quo so I think that's one argument
behind people's opposition there's also
a bit of zero what it calls zero-sum
game bias where people are saying well
we shouldn't do this because the
resources would be better spent
elsewhere I saw an op-ed in Wired a few
weeks ago where people were saying well
or just one person actually it was was
writing where this person said you
shouldn't worry about the plastic
pollution issue you shouldn't do
anything about it because climate change
is the biggest issue and our attention
should go there plastic pollution is
just a distraction and that's foolish
well yeah I think yeah there's seven
half billion people's in the world and
we can do more than one thing at the
same time I think yeah I mean what
should you not wash your dishes because
your carpet is dirty it doesn't make any
sense both of them are a problem I don't
clean both of them this is this idea
that you should only think about climate
change so oh don't think about the giant
Pacific Garbage Patch is twice as big as
Texas are you fucking serious
it's a dumb argument both of them are
important to think about both of them
reporting but a part of writing an
article today is writing something that
people will get upset about that's part
of it is like generating our clickbait
stuff having controversial opinions
being in contrarian all those things are
profitable today there's a giant part of
why people write articles they don't
write articles they don't write articles
to state an objective well-thought-out
perspective always sometimes people do
but a lot of times people make
and click baby bullshit and they kind of
twist a story and twist an idea who you
are
twist it to sort of make their narrative
make more compelling be more compelling
and Brett sell more or click more and
get more ad sales yeah I wonder whether
that's in part behind the growing
tribalism and polarization that you see
everywhere social media I mean the fact
that Facebook's algorithms in in a sense
support outrage right like these these
things are designed to support my friend
Ari Shaffir tested this and it's really
interesting because he tested it to find
out what did it what does it actually
support what it actually supports is
what you're interested in if you're
interested me outraged it'll show you
the things that outraged you so he
decided to just only YouTube puppies
yeah and that's all YouTube it's shown
there's puppies he's like no you
assholes this is what you're into if
you're into fucking getting bad about
the border and getting mad about the
climate and getting mad about abortion
and getting mad about whatever the fuck
it is that's what it'll show you because
that's what you're interested in you
know my YouTube feed is mostly muscle
cars and fights why cuz that's what I'm
interested in you know I'm just that's
like you know and occasionally science
things yeah but that's just because
that's what you search for that's it'll
show you what you search for I'm sure
you're somewhat happy that it shows you
those things yes sure I don't think I
don't think it's as sinister as people
want to say it is I think that the issue
is human nature we are compelled to get
upset about things and I think a lot of
it is people that feel disempowered in
their own existence the people that you
were talking about that are stuck in
cubicles and that are staring at that
clock waiting for the buzzer to ring so
they can go home those people are online
they're tweeting they're taking a shit
and tweeting fuck this guy's a little
kid think she's gonna fix their
sparkling trip there's a lot of what's
going on there's a lot of people that
are upset because they're just it's fun
to be upset when your life sucks it's
fun to shit on somebody sure it's fun to
get mad about the border or when you
know you don't live in fucking sounds
Dakota you know we're near the border
what are you worried about what you're
worried about you're just angry people
just angry you know it's like these
aren't logical discussions of people are
having their
shout offs and hmm and it's it's a
natural part of human nature to get
upset about stuff and you know and even
someone who's doing something as
beautiful as your perspective and or
your your idea instead of just saying
like this this guy is doing something
amazing we need someone like this who's
just as innovative and just as inspired
to try to tackle this climate issue you
need more people like em this is amazing
instead of that like you're spending
your resources incorrectly yeah yeah
well yeah actually are you talking about
it yeah and yeah I suppose it's you know
from the perspective of the person who
who writes that it's you think she's got
a point yeah and and then and indeed if
you're just saying what everyone else
says nobody would see your opinion
exactly that's a big part well there's
the journalists are fucked right now and
it's not their fault it's just print
journalism is almost on the way out in
terms of like buying things and buying
newspapers and buying magazines their
numbers are radically down sure
so they resort to online things well
there are in the online world do you
have so much competition you have
competition from a million different
things that people can choose to look at
or read and you know to get them to read
a fucking article like you gotta you
gotta have something good in there
so you have to distort you have to
inflame you have to get people polarize
gotta get on the set
you gotta paint a picture that makes you
want to click on this like what is he
doing that fucking idiots waste his time
trying to pull truck doesn't he know
what crap Thornburg has been saying how
dare you that's and that's what's going
on then yeah you know but it's it's just
a fun weird time for humans you know
there's there's a lot of negative things
but there's also a lot of positive
things it's a fun weird time there's a
lot going on and it's happening very
very very quickly and the
prognosticators that people are trying
to you know have some sort of an idea of
where this is all going no one really
knows and change is happening it's such
a rapid pace that it scares every
bunny so they're looking at defined
things and they're looking for control
and they're looking to be the person
who's got it figured out because
nobody's got it figured out it's madness
the earth is heating the fucking ice
caps are melting the fish are
disappearing people are eating dolphins
it's madness it's madness out there the
fucking Garbage Patch is growing and
growing and growing if it wasn't for
someone like you who's actually acting
and doing something about it would just
get worse you have a workable solution
you should be applauded yeah fuck that
guy you heard me right Jamie I don't
think it's fucking hard yeah yeah
Jamie group consensus pretty yes
consensus is fuck that guy yeah but but
I think it doesn't create like so maybe
that guy's trying to make a living or
she or there are they yeah they're
trying to make a living you know I mean
I don't understand it's like in this day
and age like you have to you have things
you have to write about so they write
about things and it might not
necessarily be you know honest so how do
you incentivize the truth let's question
again again I think we're in this
transitionary phase and I also think
technology is going to make a lot of
what we're concentrating on obsolete I
think we are really really close to some
crazy breakthroughs in terms of
distribution of information that's gonna
make it obsolete and people aren't gonna
care as much about clickbait T things
because you know you're gonna be able to
feel things from digitally created media
we think we're very very close to
augmented reality becoming an essential
part of people's lives you know the same
way your phone has become an essential
part of your life twenty years ago no
one carried a phone around those are
very rare and you would and you know
1999 I mean a small percentage of people
had phones on them now it's a hundred
percent right all this stuff is
happening at this exponentially
increasing rate when they implement
augmented reality who was telling us
that apples like somewhere around 2021
man I might have been I've been looking
that up he happened it once or twice
definitely did might have been you but
some other folks have brought it up to
that apples
really close and they're there in the
process right now developing some sort
of augmented reality goggles and they'll
be like glasses like you know you put on
pair of you know just like this but
you'll be seeing all these things in
front of you you'll be able to move them
around you're able to see navigation
you'll turn it on and off it'll probably
work on Siri you'll be able to talk to
it and you're gonna be able to get video
and information written was podcasts all
these things music it's gonna come
through this and probably this is one
step in this ever increasing trend of us
getting further and further immersed in
technology and augmented reality will
lead to some sort of impossible to
determine virtual reality where it's
indistinguishable from regular reality
we're like we're like 50 years away from
literally being in the matrix yeah yeah
so I I think it's under appreciated how
much our behavior is also guided by
technology I mean of course we have our
genes our genotype which kind of lies at
the most fundamental level of how our
behaviors are formed that's why you know
there is such a thing as human nature
but then there is this whole sort of
cultural layer but that but we humans
created around us which I called a
Technosphere maybe other people have
different names for it but it's indeed
I've recently read we we interact with
something like thirty thousand
inventions or thirty thousand
technologies through our entire lives
that's a huge amount and I think that
environment that shapes your behavior it
decides what kind of genes are expressed
and the interesting thing is it's not
just a natural environment but it's an
environment we create so so probably now
when you think about people being born
thousands of years ago their genes were
very very similar to the people today
yet how they behave is completely
different
again at violets and why is that the
case it's thanks to these inventions not
just yeah there's a co inventions but
also cultural inventions and
institutions that we created that you
know shapes our behavior and probably
human nature is the human behavior is
very hard to change unless it actually
benefits what what we do look at you
know smartphones how fast that happened
first is how long it takes for smoking
to to go away you know one is one is
kind of incentivizing the continued use
of it through addictive products while
with with smartphones it's again it's
it's something that you you want to use
so so I just wonder whether you know
that interaction between humans and the
technology that we create kind of invent
incentivizes inventors to become morally
better and better because they all right
did she lose me already or no no no so
the question is what people are
incentivized primarily by profit right
right but the you know the behavior that
people express is kind of shaped by but
the world they live in and who knows
maybe a person today is it's more
instant device to to do good things
because of the environment that has been
created rather than a thousand years ago
no I think that's absolutely the case
and I hope that people's ability to
express themselves through social media
all those often negative and bitchy
sometimes also it can give you a sense
of the moral landscape of the culture
like not just the people on the far
fringes that are the the most angry and
vehement about things but people that
have objective real rational thoughts
like the the the fact that you were able
to read that article and objectively
assess whether or not someone has any
good points or not
if we could all do that about everything
you know if people have that sort of
perspective instead of being so
reactionary instead of being so angry
about things just look at criticisms
look at possibilities look at all these
different things and then shape
technology to fit within our ethical and
moral boundaries so there's part of
theirs and also there it's very
profitable right because if if things
don't feel if you don't have like a
guilty feeling about buying something
every time I get a plastic straw now I
feel guilty right if there was something
that you that people where they innovate
to the point where you don't feel guilty
supporting products and you felt like
this company has the same sort of ethics
and ideas that you have that's all good
and I think we're moving more towards
that but again we're dealing with a very
short window of time where human beings
have had to adapt to this an incredible
amount of change there takes place
during a small period of time yeah it's
kind of them where one way to look at
problems is that it's kind of this chasm
between human nature human behavior and
how we want the world to be and indeed
social media is that's the case but
similarly for environmental problems
we humans are are driven by certain
things and you know self-interest is
definitely a big part of it and yet
that's not creating the world right now
that we want to live in because the the
Technosphere the technology that is in
the interface between the worlds or so
sort of nature and human nature that
interface is not compatible with both so
you either have something that's
compatible with human nature so it's
like a big car with a v8 engine but
that's not compatible with with nature
or yes something that's compatible with
nature which is for you know walking but
it's not really comfortable with human
nature because we're you know lazy and
greedy it's cold outside and you know
you're in a snowstorm
exactly so ideally what we do is rather
than trying to change humans which I
don't think is a very futile activity
because there is such a thing as human
nature we have genes
of this evolutionary history rather than
trying to change that I think is much
more effective to change the the
technology around us that you know
enables our our inner desires and
behaviors to be positive rather than
negative I agree with you I think it's
gonna be difficult though to get that
same sort of positive result when it
comes to our addiction to technology our
addiction to smartphones in particular I
mean for a long time it was like
televisions right like people talked
about how much kids watch TV kids watch
TV eight hours a day it's so much it's
so bad you don't really hear that
anymore right you hear about phones and
this is a sort of an undiscussed rapid
shift in what we waste our time doing
right and most of it is you hear people
talking about and most of the use of
these phones I would I'd be willing to
bet a giant chunk of that social media
yes right yeah and I suppose that's
again this sort of infantile stage of
that technology is now in Taos
adolescent but yeah so I think you're
right yeah it's it's again probably we
can engineer social media and our
information technology to incentivize
people to do good things but indeed now
it's it's probably incentivizing the use
of scrolling through timelines because
you watch more ads I also I think it's
our bodies and our minds and the way we
view the world it's we're not designed
to live in this digital realm sure this
is a completely new thing for the
species and I think we don't really know
how to handle the dopamine rush that we
get from clicking on Instagram and
scrolling through your feeds and
checking your DMS and reading your
emails and constantly interacting with
people and checking did he text me back
what did he say oh well that's
interesting what about this and that and
this and that you're just all day all
day interacting with some digital device
we're not made for this
to go outside you know and then you have
you know very bright engineers somewhere
in a big shiny building a be testing all
day to see whether you know a red dots
on a certain icon in the social media
app makes people click more or less and
that's yeah well Instagram is kind of
dabbling with this idea of taking away
the likes right like what if we just
didn't show anyone who likes right you
don't know how many likes you get you
put up a picture it's just a fucking
picture move on yeah no you put up a
picture he got 70,000 likes for that
picture what the fuck man you check it
checking an hour later 74,000 oh it's
going viral
yes that's weird that that likes thing
is one of the weirdest drugs nobody saw
coming and people get addicted to you
know saying things that get likes right
putting things up that are socially
conscious to let everybody know let
everybody know how virtuous you are and
exactly likes getting likes yeah and
it's it's all making use of I suppose
the the flaws of our or human nature
what I'm worried is it one day those
likes will actually be a physical
feeling oh yeah you get like a little
jolt and though engineer the system to
get you to seek those constant love
jolts yes why not I mean if they look if
if they're gonna give you augmented
reality we are how many generations I
don't know away from something something
being embedded in your body right people
have already decided to do that there's
some was a guy or girl embedded a
fucking Tesla Model 3 key their arm so
that they didn't ever have to have their
key in their pocket they could just walk
up there Tesla and the fucking door
unlocks wait does the climbing software
updates key doesn't work anymore I
thought it runs out of battery isn't
gonna cut you open like a fish
just I mean what the fuck are people
doing those are people at the fringes
they are the fringes but there's more of
them than you think and if they make it
more they make it simple like you just
need like a like a flu shot
just know whether there is any sort of
innate fear or aversion towards crossing
that interior/exterior boundary with
technology fair is a good way of looking
at right like what is fair is it fair if
you agree to do it look look is it fair
if you decide to get a face tattoo
all right if you if it's up to you man
but if it's fair if it's like hey man
my credit card company told me that give
me 10% off if I stick this you know this
credit card chip under my skin somewhere
yes I suppose if you again incentivize
it with yeah with selfish interests yeah
maybe it will take up there's that and
there's also the big concern is what if
these jamming we're talking about income
inequality in this world a big one would
be what if there's a jump that you can
make in enlightenment and intelligence
access to information number crunching
the ability to assess risk versus reward
this is all done computer wise and it's
it's done through some sort of
additional piece of hardware that they
give you or and put in your body but it
costs a lot of money so the people that
can afford it initially are the people
that are valuable they have money in the
first place
so the wealthy people are ready because
it's very valuable but then the people
that really need it they can't afford it
so by the time it becomes something ever
all the money's gone everybody's chewed
it all up everybody's figured out how to
hack the system you should become a
writer for a black mirror that seems
like a black mare episode it seems like
it would work right yeah that's well
that's what people are worried about
when it comes to longevity - right
they're worried about technological
innovations and are allowed people to
you know nanobots and all sorts of
different weird things gonna repair
cells and allow them to live for
extended periods of time but then who
are these people going to be are they
gonna be the king class you know are
they gonna be this super duper wealthy
people of the future that are gonna you
know hold this over the poor folks you
can't afford the technology yeah yeah so
it truly seems like the
the technologies that we're developing
are that at least are not too far away
our institutions aren't ready yet
to to really cope with us
no because definitely that would be
probably increase inequality koyla yes
that that is one of the major concerns
when it comes to this sort of rapid
change that we're facing right now you
know another one of course is artificial
intelligence there's there's people that
I respect very very much that have a
very negative view of what the future of
artificial technology is gonna mean to
the human race you nervous ilan alone
yeah both of them scare the shit out of
me every time I talk about it yeah Sam
Sam Sam and I did an episode and I where
he talked about artificial intelligence
and the rise of it in the fact that once
it's uncorked it's really not going to
be able to be put back in the bottle
yeah and we talked about for like an
hour and a half and after it was over
like the rest of day I was bummed out
sure I was like this is inevitable yes
so the president have a very I suppose a
very optimistic and pessimistic view of
technology at the same time I think on
one hand it allows us to to improve the
world and that's what we've seen and
it's it's gradual and it continues
probably because people want to solve
their own problems and with that
inadvertently solve other people's
problems that's progress happens I
believe but then at the same time while
the world is getting a lot better it's
also getting riskier I mean two thousand
years ago or maybe even two hundred
years ago there was no way to wipe out
humanity that simply wasn't if you even
if you wanted to to happen very badly
you know you could scream wouldn't
happen now though there are actually
people who have the power to do that and
rapidly like you could the whole of
humanity could be wiped out in a day
yeah and now it's fortunate just a few
people would imagine if that goes from a
few people to quite a few corporation
- maybe right even everyone I think
there's a there's this this sort of
brain teaser or mental experiment that
Nick Bostrom came up with that says well
what if you could have kind of this
atomic bomb that you could just make
yourself in your microwave it's like
well maybe at some point in time we
would just not be economically feasible
anymore to rebuild cities because I
don't know it's on one hand you know and
so I think that's kind of the this this
the scary you know risky aspect of it
but at the same time when you think of
it
I would much rather trust or n trust and
an average person today with the button
for a nuclear detonation detonation
device than somebody a thousand years
ago oh sure I'm one of the Mongols or
someone some savage Nick Ostrom freaked
me out man and we had a conversation
about probability of life being a
simulation it's very high probability
it's more probable that we're in a
simulation now than we're not and my
puny monkey brain to some logic yes
that's that's where it gets weird we
deal with the number of potential
civilizations out there the number of
human beings the amount of time that
life has had a chance to evolve not just
here but everywhere in the entire
universe
one of the possibilities that a
simulation has occurred already very
high were the possibilities that we're
in a simulation right now also pretty
high simply because there's only one
base layer yeah simulation so yeah also
life seems fake right it seems weird see
there's so much of it that seems like
boy this is okay a few weeks ago I saw
like a duck in a palm just making an
infinite sir because I said that's
definitely a glitch yeah yeah yeah
someone needs to fix the code yeah yeah
of course it's lots of fun to think
about those things but
you know rennet II well that's what's
the depressing things that we'll likely
never know wow maybe maybe one time
somebody will figure out the solution
and dystopian view of the futures it's I
mean I get I get the perspective I get
the dystopian perspective but right now
as we said like you know according to
Pinker according to statistics things
are really better than they've been
before and my concern is that but my
concern is what one of the things that
Ilan said that where the biological
bootloader correct artificial life I
mean look when a caterpillar makes a
cocoon it doesn't know what the fuck
it's doing it just does it you know just
makes the cocoon it becomes a butterfly
well you know we're buying the iPhone 36
and the cyber trucks and trying to get a
solar-powered plane right off the ground
we're probably giving into this thing or
this look what we have right now is more
than sufficient for survival if we just
decided if we got all the people in the
world say hey watches we make watches
that keep perfect time computers they
get online it's great you can download
YouTube videos cameras they're very
clear they take very clear pictures okay
CTV's look great everything looks great
internet speeds pretty fucking good man
especially 5g let's stop yeah
everybody stop stop stop making stuff
stop it just met everything we have
right now just keep making it no no new
innovation let's just enjoy life
together right that sounds like it's
that sounds so logical but yet also so
ridiculous like no one's gonna agree to
that no I phone 37 is already in
production rich it's gonna be better and
faster it's gonna wrap around your dick
and keep you comfort at night it's
they're gonna figure out better stuff no
matter what forever it's part of what
makes people people we have this
unquenchable thirst for innovation
that's one of the weird things that
freaks me out about this move towards
technology is that materialism which
seems to be this like really standard
behavior with a giant percentage of the
population like people
really into things and this desire to
have the newest greatest things is what
propels innovation because there's a
financial incentive because people are
making money off of selling you these
better watches that you don't really
need or these better cars or these
better computers and all these things
just keep getting better and better and
better and better and a lot of it is
fueled by this weird desire that people
have for stuff sure which doesn't make
any sense like how where'd that come
from well that might be the stuff that
makes the caterpillar make the cocoon
yeah I mean it's probably just making
use of the same biological mechanisms as
social media right it's you feel like
you need it
yep tricks little tricks oh yeah and
next thing you know they go listen we
have two options
either we let artificial life take over
and be the superior life form or we
merge well it's just smart let's just
make friends yeah just make friends with
artificial intelligence take this little
chip boy huh yeah well so probably if
it's possible and it likely is it's
probably pretty inevitable that it's
going to happen I think it was Edison
that said that I never invented anything
I just took elements of was there
probably the quote is a lot better than
I'm paraphrasing now but it's kind of if
it's possible you know it's kind of yes
there it's right it should be already
invented yes
you just have to discover it Marcia so
sir probably that's going to happen but
what does give me hope is that to my
point of the nuclear detonator thousand
years ago for this now it seems like we
are getting more responsible and our
ability to foresee the future allows us
to invent things but it also allows us
to to kind of think about the risks and
to to try and mitigate the risks before
they they happen and I don't think
there's nearly is enough enough
attention given to these existential
risks but the fact that some people are
thinking about it is yeah
it's kind of hopeful no I agree I really
do
and I and I'm posing these things about
this dystopian potential future just
because really it's probably something
we should think about but I am hopeful
that as technology improves our
understanding of humans improves along
with it and and and also that perhaps
some technology like I'm not exactly
sure what this neural link thing is with
Elan these coming up with but I think
something is some of it has to do with a
much more rapid access to information
sure you know that it has to do with the
increasing bandwidth yeah increased
bandwidth yeah
hopefully that will become I mean you
don't want to say hopefully some fucking
wires they stick in your brain will
become standard because that seems that
seems like we are much to him I mean
that is merging right that's that's
that's the merge with technology
Marshall McLuhan said the greatest thing
about this said human beings of sex
organs of the machine world what a great
quote right yeah that's one of those
quotes you just go whoa fuck that is
exactly what it is the machine world
can't make itself needs us like if we do
make artificial life and McLuhan I think
wrote that in the 60s yeah I think
that's from what is the book he's got a
book media something but what is
Marshall McLuhan so so it's uh it's a
broader point that our full
understanding media or media
understanding media that's it for yeah
1964 imagine if that guy called it yeah
in 64 so so definitely it's it's a it's
a broader point of people make and that
we are in a way enslaved by our
technology and that I think in the book
sapiens by Harari yeah
great book he makes the point about
grain enslaving us because the
Agricultural Revolution ten thousand
years ago they we didn't really become
better according to him it was less
nutritious it was it was just a
worse way of living than the
hunter-gatherers did but it was very
good for the population of grain and
there was no way back for us
so I suppose yeah that's the thing with
all our inventions they there are these
these Lockean effects that can kind of
look us into an inferior position yeah
and yeah so so you know of course the
risk with artificial intelligence is
that a similar thing happens and that's
not very benign and yeah we didn't
foresee those consequences that we will
be locked in in the year 2065 it's one
of the more fascinating things about
people though that we have the ability
to contemplate the possibilities that we
have the ability to look at this and go
okay what are we doing here hold on hold
on we're making a mistake here look what
we've got us doing but good Rice's got
us doing damn it look how much people
there are in the city there's so many
people in the city what are we gonna
feed all these people shit right we
didn't think of this we just kept
breeding and you know that's the big
concern when people start developing too
into new areas when people start
expanding the the technological or the
the rather societal sprawl when you see
these urban sprawl is just slowly
encroaching on new land right and
pushing out into areas where there was
no houses before that's always weird for
me when I Drive by a place like Boulder
Colorado does a really good job of
limiting the amount of construction that
gets done there right they're pretty
fierce about it but even they have been
sort of lightening up a little things
have been getting built and every now
and then I'll drive by like if I'm in
Colorado my oh that wasn't there before
now it's there everybody thinks it's
harmless no big deal just a new building
used to be an open field who's that
helping it's not helping anyone
and then another building outside of
that and then you know you could you
have the ability to look in time 50
years from now you yeah you see this
spread we're this weird wort of humanity
and starts moving across the globe this
cool feature and Google Maps where you
can have for Google Earth where you can
have time lapses from satellite photos
like past six years and for them really
Dubai 30 years ago nothing and you
something I'll be the example that's a
crazy example that place is so strange
it's like Las Vegas on steroids yeah Las
Vegas on steroids with its own Islands
man-made islands the shape of the world
like all the different continents that
world you seen that yeah and it's not
doing it like it's some of it apparently
they have to like keep adjusting because
the tide rises and the pretty dumb
actually is this the Google Maps thing
called another one but there's another
one to buy
oh my god this is insane this is insane
it's happening so fast
how many years is this spanning Oh 20 oh
my god that's amazing so the actually
some of our engineers used to work for
the dredger and they helped build the
the palm islands and pretty the problem
is that the water doesn't really move in
the arms of the the palms so it kind of
gets stinky and oh okay so this prime
real estate
that's just stinks oh no really oh that
makes sense
but the water in between it would get
stale of course that makes sense
fuck this is bonkers this videos bunker
you know either actual oh there's the
yeah that's the thing so all that water
inside yeah it doesn't get recycled it
doesn't move around yeah how the fuck
that they had to do that to keep the
like an ocean break right the both the
water from smashing into it like the
outside rim
you can't just pump everything so now
what do they do with all the stinky
water you just accept it good question
that fucking world's tallest building is
BA Nana's right that thing I've seen
pictures that people have taken from the
top floor it doesn't even look real like
all you flat earthers you need to go to
Dubai get up there you could literally
see the curve yeah and when you stand on
its foot because of its shape it looks
they even told her can you see the curve
from up there see if go to think so no
thing so maybe on an airplane you can't
you can kind that's true with a bit of
yeah you got a design this
yeah yeah yeah you got to be way up
great would you go and one of those
virgins trips they do a virgin spaceship
fly above the earth and once there's
good safety statistics right for you
fuck early adopting yeah it's pretty not
good to be an early adopter either yeah
well just base area
what kind of psychos and want to be on
that first flight well I suppose
Richards would have to go and one of the
first ones themselves right oh if I was
him I would clone myself and put a fake
me on that and see if that bitch blows
off I wouldn't trust UNDOF oh yeah what
is this Jamie is this for oh I'm getting
vertigo just looking down I am freaking
out
I get like legit this is all GoPro so
this is what would flat earthers use to
show that the earth is actually flat
it's the perspective shift but just the
height of that goddamn thing makes my
palms sweat I was there last year
and there was somebody sticking her
phone out of the No yes oh god damn
people are crazy yes
how did she dropped it and it fell and
just went right through someone's
fucking head like literally like a
missile in your head would just explode
you manage getting hit in the head with
a cellphone from a mile up motherfucker
that's good motherfucker people are so
crazy would take so long to put the word
burst mode yes a new perspective to that
term they should have like an alarm that
goes off when someone drops something
someone can quickly hit an alarm and by
the time it hits the bottom the bottom
floor will hear bad man they get all
back away from the building these guys
are on the tip top no shut the fuck up
oh my god they're hanging on like these
guys this kids with his dad it looks
gross dad's crazy - right you're both
fucking nuts dude my hands are sweating
right now I can't handle these oh that
dude that we've had on James
with a k' do Kingman Kingman James the
guy who does those said it Kingman right
he does these videos from these fucking
places Kingston thank you sorry James
it's America I smoke a lot of weed no
he's uh he lives in England okay and he
takes these videos where he's like
hanging on by one hand with a fucking
selfie stick yes looking down science
skyscrapers and sweat so hard just
watching those I can't imagine if I was
actually doing that what a terrible
fucking instinct or a terrible thing
that happens to people when you see
people hanging onto something your hands
sweat hmm so do your hands sweat when
you're hanging it's not helping you
that's the worst thing that could happen
is your hands get all slippery fuck man
this channel looks like he recently had
an accident he's a video post on
September 11 says the day nearly died
and he's got a big old like stitches -
well we talked to him about that when he
was on the podcast does he think about
that look but he's kind of locked into
that now you're sort of married to this
idea that you you know you're the guy
who goes up there and does that you
can't just say well I've done it no more
it's like the green yep it's like the
green
yeah he's married to the thrill well
Alex Honnold is the best example that
right he's this free solo guy oh yeah a
free solo climber that goes oh El
Capitan with no ropes it's did you watch
the yes fucking thousand I've had him on
the podcast a couple of times he freaks
me out I just don't understand how he
can do it I get I I get it you know I
get that's his thing he's passionate
about it and again sweaty it's just a
weird thing that people do where they
try to activate their adrenaline glands
you know they try to activate their
thrill glands right yeah I do respect
that I mean he's it's his passion and he
he follows this yeah I shouldn't some
people clean the ocean people climb
45-degree angle backwards a sizable
Mountain wouldn't want to be a Semele
but
No right try it it looks like he might
have stopped doing that
I mean instant he might be getting paid
to still do it as like a stunt person
for movies because he did one for a
movie recently but he has a video from
this year recently says that YouTube do
monetize all his videos and he just has
been posting car stuff YouTube is D
monetized as videos bloggers they don't
want incentive I probably oh wow that's
interesting
he's had a video explaining it you could
probably talk about I guess at the end
of climbing YouTube to monetize me
August 22nd that's interesting
understand huh
being more realistic yeah but here's the
thing they do monetize it but yet they
still have it up and they still have an
algorithm that will click you after his
video and suggest a bunch of other shit
they're gonna monetize but it might not
have ads on it right his video I'm sure
doesn't have ads on it but that doesn't
mean it's not that effectively a part of
their system
like that that sort of that's gets
revenue because you know they're gonna
recommend a bunch of videos that do have
Adams you're gonna keep clicking I think
they're as far as YouTube stance is just
like if an advertiser solved their ad on
this video we can't be a part of that
well I think also from YouTube's
perspective almost all of is illegal
yeah good point
that's I think that's a big one like I
don't think you could do a legal shit on
YouTube and get money off of it then
then they would be responsible in some
sort of a way right yeah boy um we're
over here fixing the world dude yeah
done anything else huh
do we cover it all basically yeah I
think that's oh yeah of course
Yoshi cave does come people went to how
ocean clean up the ocean clean ocean the
ocean clean up calm people please go
there and help well we'll help too
we would love to contribute love to be a
part of this for sure if there's
anything else we can do if there's
anything that you need promoted or want
to let people know we'd be happy to help
but uh thank you thanks for being you
man thanks for inventing this and thanks
for pursuing this so dogged Lee and have
being so obsessed with what is an
incredibly worthy cause appreciate you
man well
so much my pleasure all right bye
everybody see you
[Music]